Less 1:1 meetings
===================

:date: 2024-08-18 12:00
:language: en-GB
:author: eloycoto
:head: Less 1:1 meetings
:index_title: Less 1:1 meetings
:metatitle: Improving Team Communication: Why I Replaced Weekly 1:1s with Status Emails and Monthly Check-ins
:tags: thoughts
:metatags: team communication, performance reviews, employee development, workplace productivity, team meetings, management tips, status updates, 1:1 meetings, manager-employee relations, remote work communication
:description: Discover why I transitioned from weekly 1:1 meetings to a more effective communication strategy involving weekly status emails and monthly performance check-ins. Learn how this change improved team dynamics, reduced unnecessary pressure, and enhanced my overall productivity and job satisfaction.
:keywords: team communication, 1:1 meetings, performance management, workplace productivity, employee development, management strategies, status emails, remote work, team dynamics, workplace improvement

Over the past few years, I had weekly 1:1 meetings with my manager. However,
after returning from a long sick leave, I realized that these meetings were
doing more harm than good.

While weekly 1:1s are useful for identifying issues, they created the following
problems for me:

- In weekly 1:1s, team problems are often managed by the manager, which is
  counterproductive. Why would you fix something within the team when your
  manager is already handling it? Managers should focus on eliminating
  roadblocks rather than managing team dynamics.
- Weekly 1:1s also prevent you from filtering out minor issues, leading to
  discussions about trivial matters every week. This constant focus on problems
  negatively impacts morale.
- What about Performance & Development (P&D)? Are we really working on
  performance weekly? That’s unrealistic. P&D should be done in year/6months.
  Weekly focus on P&D doesn’t provide any personal benefit and get you to focus
  in short goals instead of big goals.

What I'm doing instead of meetings?
-----------------------------------

Weekly email status:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, I'm sending a weekly email with status update, something that my
manager can digest. If something is on fire, we can have a quick chat. The
template that I'm using is:

- **Status:** The two sentence status about how the week was.
- **Blocker:** If I can see any blocker out there.
- **Pain:** The list of things that are painful this week, and if something can
  be fixed.
- **Achievements:** Things that I achieved this week
- **Next Goals:** Goals for the next week

Monthly 1:1
~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are focused on performance and development. I usually send my agenda to
my manager beforehand. During these meetings, I concentrate on my own progress
and what I can do to improve, rather than on team matters.

Team meetings:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I'm trying to write more, **a lot more**. In my dayly standups(slack) I'm
trying to explain all with more details.

What am I aiming to achieve?
-----------------------------

- **No more private messages:** Does it make sense to have private
  conversations with my manager? No! This encourages me to bring up issues in
  team meetings instead.
- **Discuss team matters with the team:** If something is important, it should
  be discussed with the team. In my current project, where personal agendas are
  prevalent, having public discussions helps others identify and address
  issues.


Does it work?
-------------

Currently, I can see that I do not complain weekly, so my mod is much better at
the end of the week. I also focus more in the roadblocks and long term. In
terms of development, I don't have weekly nosense preasure. I'm happy as hell
with this idea, let's see in the long term if that works.
