2024: The year of tumours and challenges
=========================================
:date: 2024-12-17 23:00
:language: en-GB
:author: eloycoto
:tags:  thoughts
:head: A Year of Resilience: My 2024 Journey
:index_title: 2024: Recovery, Reading, and Resilience
:metatitle: From Hospital Beds to 94 Books: A Patient's Journey Through 2024
:metatags: medical recovery, patient story, resilience, reading during recovery, hospital stay, personal growth
:description: A personal account of a year spent battling health challenges, including 100+ days of bed rest, two surgeries, and finding strength through reading 94 books and continuous learning.
:keywords: medical recovery, surgery recovery, hospital stay, patient journey, book reading, resilience, personal growth, health challenges, hip surgery, rehabilitation, patient story


This year has been a journey of resilience, marked by two surgeries and
multiple recovery periods. Currently, I'm in the midst of another two-month bed
rest, reflecting on the path that brought me here.

Late August brought the unwelcome discovery of a second 6cm tumor in my hip.
The most difficult part to accept is that I've now lost almost my entire right
hip (seven-eighths of my gluteus medius muscle is now gone 🤯). This new
reality means life will be different moving forward – while I can manage daily
activities with a limp, I've had to bid farewell to some activities: housework,
running, hiking, and long-distance traveling.

Every physical activity now comes with a cost, but this has made me more
strategic in my approach to life. Each step must be carefully considered,
pushing me to become more effective in everything I do. These two motherf*****
may have changed my body, **but they haven't diminished my spirit!**


While soccer and running may no longer be in my future, countless other
possibilities remain open. Some friends have even suggested I should consider
participating in the Paralympics for CRI😂.

I find inspiration in one of the most successful people I know – a man who lost
his hand in a sailing accident. Despite this challenge, he built a thriving
company, raised three children, and showed us all that anything is possible. He
continues to live with joy, teaching us invaluable lessons about resilience.
**Now, it seems it's my turn to show others what's possible! 💪**

2024 by the Numbers:

- More than 100 days spent in bed
- 33 days in the hospital
- 188 days with crutches
- 90 days with a walking stick
- 96 heparin injections
- 4 MRI scans
- 94 books read
- 7 talks organized at the Hackspace
- 4 Khan Academy courses completed
- And finally, countless lessons learned
