Playing with ESPHome
=====================

:date: 2024-04-22 17:00
:language: en-GB
:author: eloycoto
:head: Playing with ESPHome, how to read compost bin temperature
:index_title: Playing with ESPHome
:metatitle: Learn How to Set Up a Smart Compost Bin with ESPHome: A User-Friendly Guide
:tags: embedded, esphome
:metatags: embedded, esphome
:description: Discover ESPHome, a user-friendly open-source platform for IoT projects. Explore how to set up a smart compost bin to monitor temperature and improve composting efficiency effortlessly using YAML configurations. Dive into the benefits of ESPHome over proprietary firmware and its compatibility with ESP32 and RISC-V devices.
:keywords: ESPHome, open-source projects, smart compost bin, IoT, ESP32, RISC-V, firmware alternatives, YAML configuration, MQTT reporting, temperature monitoring, compost bin safety, user experience, deep sleep feature, efficient power usage, lambda calls, C++ integration

Have you heard of `ESPHome <https://esphome.io/index.html>`_? It is one of the
projects which understand how important is user experience in any project,
especially in an open-source project. ESP ecosystem is growing, and there are a
bunch of projects out there that simplify complex tasks

Personally, I'm not a big fan of proprietary firmware of ESP32, and I like the
`alternative projects
<https://zeus.ugent.be/blog/23-24/open-source-esp32-wifi-mac/>`_ out there. On
the other hand, the RISC-V devices are just great and have impressive RTOS
support.

In the past, I always used `Tasmota firmware
<https://tasmota.github.io/docs/>`_. However, the other day, I needed to make a
more complex project which reads the compost bin temperature and reports it
over MQTT. The project is based on a ESP32 with an NTC thermistor.

While I could gone with Rust embedded, I decided to give ESPhome a try! All that
took was ~2 hours, the following yaml and running `esphome run` command:

.. code-block:: yaml
  ---
  esphome:
    name: compostBin

  esp32:
    board: nodemcu-32s2
    variant: esp32s2
    framework:
      type: arduino

  # Logger must be at least debug (default)
  logger:
    level: DEBUG

  web_server:
    port: 80

  wifi:
    ssid: "SSID"
    password: "PASSWORD"

    ap:
      ssid: "compostbin"
      password: "compostbin"

  captive_portal:

  mqtt:
    broker: my-mqtt-broker
    username: compostbin
    password: compostbin

  sensor:

    - platform: ntc
      sensor: resistance_sensor
      name: NTC Temperature B Constant
      calibration:
       b_constant: 3950
       reference_temperature: 25°C
       reference_resistance: 10kOhm

    - platform: resistance
      id: resistance_sensor
      sensor: source_sensor
      configuration: DOWNSTREAM
      resistor: 10kOhm
      reference_voltage: 3.3V
      name: Resistance Sensor

    - platform: adc
      id: source_sensor
      name: ADC Voltage
      filters:
        - offset:  +0.14
        - multiply: 3.3
      pin: 1
      update_interval: 5s

   deep_sleep:
     run_duration: 15s
     sleep_duration: 180min

With ESPHome, setting up this project was quick. The YAML configuration
encapsulates everything needed, from defining sensors to configuring Wi-Fi and
MQTT. Plus, the deep sleep feature ensures efficient power usage for
battery-operated setups. For complex scenarios, I really love the lambda calls
and the C++ code in it.


P.S. While I don't have an immediate need to monitor the compost bin
temperature, I `discovered
<https://www.quora.com/Can-Salmonella-survive-at-60-70-degrees-Celsius>`_ that
if the temperature exceeds 70 degrees, it helps eliminate salmonella, making
the compost bin safer.
